In this lecture, you'll learn about the format of an IPv4 address,
and when we write out the IP address, we write it out as a set of 4 octets in a dotted decimal format.
So you see an example of an IPv4 Address
here,
192.168.10.15
Each of those sets of numbers is an octet. So 192 is the first octet, 168 is the second, 10 is the third,
and 15 is the fourth octet.
Each octet is 8 bits long. 8 bits,
that's why we call it the octet, and if you multiply 8 times 4, that gives you your 32 bits which
makes up the IPv4 address.
First thing I want to do is show you where you can find out the IP address on your different hosts and
devices.
So, let's look in Windows first. I'll open up a Command Prompt here, so CMD to open the Command Prompt,
and the Windows command to see your IP address is 'ipconfig', and I've got a load of output on here because
I'm running VMware on my laptop too, so I got a lot of virtual addresses on here. Let's scroll back a
bit until I find my wireless network.
This is the one I'm actually connected to my network on, and here,
if I mark this, you can see that my IPv4 address is 192.168.1.9. My subnet mask,
that you'll learn about in the next lecture, is 255.255.255.0, so that's also in dotted decimal format,
and the default gateway, which is the router that my PC would use if it needs to get out to a different
network, is at 192.168.1.1.
Now, I'm going to tie this all together when we get to the section later, which is called The Life of a
Packet, and in there, I'm going to detail how traffic gets from this source to the destination. For now,
I just want you to know that if traffic is going to another host on the same subnet, then it can go there
directly. If traffic is going to a host on a different subnet, it has to go there via a router. So you
can see my IP address is 192.168.1.9. That's the IP address on my laptop here.
The IP address on the router I would use to get out to other networks is at 192.168.1.1.
The other information you can see here as well is my IPv6 address and also the IPv6 default gateway.
We'll be talking about IPv6 in a later section. So in Windows, 'ipconfig' to get that information. Let's have
a look on Linux as well, so I'm going to open up an SSH session here to a Linux machine that I've got running,
and I'll get the command prompt on Linux. I'm going to enter my username and my password, and then the
command to see the IP information on Linux is 'ifconfig'. So 'ipconfig' on Windows, 'ifconfig' for interface
on Linux. You can see here that the IP address on this Linux host is 172.23.4.2,
and the subnet mask, the same as it was on Windows, 255.255.255.0. In Windows, 'ipconfig' will show you
the IP address, the subnet mask, and the default gateway, which is the local router. In Linux, it shows
the IP address and the subnet mask. To get the default gateway, the command is 'ip route', and you can see
here the default route from my default gateway is 172.23.4.254. Okay,
that's how you get the IP address in Windows and in Linux. Finally, let's have a look and see how we get
it in
Cisco IOS.
I've already got an SSH session open here to a Cisco router. I'm going to enter the command
'enable' to get to the enable prompt, so I can see my show commands, and actually I don't think I've configured
an IP address on this router yet.
Let's just check. The command for that is 'show ip interface brief'. Oh, I have.
Okay.
So on interface FastEthernet0/0, you can see the IP address is
192.168.10.1. To get more information, because this is only giving me the IP address, I can't see
the subnet mask here, so let's do a 'show interface'. I could do a 'show interface' or a 'show ip interface',
and I can see for FastEthernet0/0, the Internet address is 192.168.10.1, and the subnet
mask is a /24. The subnet mask can either be written in slash '/' notation or in dotted decimal.
You'll find out about that in the next lecture. With my router, I don't have a default gateway on here.
Because our router, it's the device that knows about all the different networks, so it doesn't just
point at one other router. It's going to have lots of routes in here. You'll find out about routing on the router
in other sections a bit further on in the course. Okay, so 'ipconfig' on Windows, 'ifconfig' on
Linux, and 'show interface' on our Cisco IOS, it's the same commands for both of our routers and
our switches. Okay, let's go back to the slides.
Next thing to tell you about is static and automatic addressing. On our important devices, like our
fixed devices, like our servers; network infrastructure devices, like routers, switches, and firewalls;
also on our printers, usually we will manually assign the IP address on there. For our laptops and our
desktop PCs, they'll normally be assigned an IP address automatically through the use of DHCP,
which is the Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol.
We're going to cover how to set that up later on.
The reason that you want your PCs to get their IP address automatically if you imagine we're in an office
with 6000 people for a large company, you're not going to want to have to go around 6000
different PCs and configure the IP address manually on all of them.
You can centralize that through the use of a DHCP server.
It's much more convenient. But for your fixed devices where you want to make sure the IP address is what
you think it is and it's never going to change,
like with your servers
and on your routers, you'll do it manually on them. You're going to have much less servers and routers,
so it's not so much hassle to manually set it there.
Okay,
to understand how the logical separation between our different IP subnets works, you need to understand
the IP address in binary.
That's why we had that binary lesson in the last lecture.